About
Edgemere Landfill, a former municipal dump in the Rockaways, Queens, has been closed for over 20 years. The landfill operated as a disposal site from 1938 to 1991, receiving about 1200 tons of waste per day. Today, Edgemere landfill is capped and is at the end of remedia­tion process that converted the dump into a spectacular, and yet unused, 173-acre site of­fering views of Jamaica Bay and the Manhattan skyline. The land is facing an as-yet-undeter­mined future. Its location in one of the most vulnerable – both environmentally and socially – areas of New York City suggests the great potential impact of the choice that will define its future.
 
[MAP]
 
 The objective of Landfill for New York project is to bring local residents together with a diverse group of experts and artists to understand and imagine the potential of the Edgemere site. New York City’s legacy landfills were sited to obscure their environmental and community impacts. By capping landfills like Edgemere, the City may have turned a negative influence into, at best, a net neutral. With the residents as direct partners we intend to explore strategies to create a positive impact out of an environmental scar such as Edgemere.

The project is part of Taconic Fellowship offered by Pratt Center for Community Development. 


[Read more]

Edgemere opens a variety of research questions and potential opportunities. Will the cap layers be functional forever, and will there be a moment when the landfill finds an equilibri­um with the environment with no technical assistance? What does the idea of landfill-gas to energy offer in the long term, after the gas emissions slow down? What type of new uses for the site can provide the best compensation to the community for the years of having a waste disposal site as a neighbor? Is a park on top of the cap a sustainable solution in long term? Can the high elevation of the landfill suggest other benefits for an otherwise low area en­dangered by now-more-frequent floods? Can the challenge of leaks be a testing ground for green infrastructure solutions for water purification? 

We believe that Edgemere landfill can serve as a trigger for a city-scale conversation too. Given their geographical location, Edgemere Landfill, Rockaway peninsula and Jamaica Bay watershed create an opportunity on the local level to address a variety of topics related to sustainability, environmental and social justice, and climate change. After Hurricane Sandy, Jamaica Bay and Rockaway became foci for conversations on resiliency and global climate change adaptation.

---- 
Landfill for New York is a collaboration among  Elliott Maltby, Simon Kates and Sonya
Gimon, Martha Willson and Rockaway Waterfront Alliance;

While all of the members of team represent different professions, they all share an interest and experience in bringing arts and science together as a way to create a change. Many of their projects are site-based, often sites that have an ambiguous reputation or are at the periphery of the urban design conversation. Their interests vary from cemeteries as new urban green spaces, city fortification water systems as catalyst for contemporary culture to abandoned ocean shores. These site are linked: natural or human-made landforms that are struggling to find their place in the contemporary city. Often, because of the lack of un­derstanding of their potential use, they stay neglected, commemorating a certain aspect of human heritage.
 
Landfill is another of this type of landform, created by humans for the simple reason to discard unwanted material - one that stands today as a monument to the society’s inability to plan for the long-term. The complex nature of the landfill requires a complex multi-disci­plinary range of answers: our team brings together arts, science, architecture and communi­ty-based planning.
--- 
[Read more] 
 

 Sonya Gimon is an urban designer and curator. She is also a co-founder of the Val project in Kaliningrad, Russia aiming at bringing public attention to the forgotten historical water system of the city and rethinking it as a unique non renewable cultural, environmental and recreational resource. She has organized and led multiple workshops, exhibitions, walks and other activities involving local residents, city officials, artists and professionals with an aim of rethinking the surrounding environment. Trained as an art historian and having worked as both an urban designer and art curator, she believes in applying the bold power of artistic practices to the urban design. She is currently a student at Pratt’s Sustainable Environmental Systems program and an EcoArt Fellow at Franklin Furnace.

Simon Kates has a background in both architecture and urban planning and is currently an Associate at BFJ Planning, where he has developed a specialty in planning for resilience and sustainability, waterfronts, and comprehensive plans. His recent professional work has included post-Hurricane Sandy resilience plans, development of an industrial Business Improvement District in Queens, and land use and zoning consulting services to public-sector clients. Prior to joining BFJ, he worked on the creation and management of energy efficiency incentive programs and conducted research on the impact of waterfront industrial regulations on adjacent residential communities.

Elliott Maltby is a founding partner of thread collective and a professor in Pratt’s Planning and Sustainable Environmental Systems programs. She believes that art and design can improvethe sustainability and vitality of the urban experiment, and is interested in how communities co-opt and transform derelict and peripheral landscapes. Trained as a landscape architect, Elliott has a long worked closely with artists and scientists; the Gowanus Field Stations were shaped by an ongoing dialogue with ichthyologist and author John Waldman. With choreographer Jennifer Monson, she is developing an innovative cross-disciplinary collaboration platform for researching urban ecologies, using the body as an instrument

Martha Wilson is an artist and founder of Franklin Furnace. Its mission is to present, preserve, interpret, proselytize and advocate on behalf of avant-garde art, especially forms that may be vulnerable due to institutional neglect, cultural bias, their ephemeral nature, or politically unpopular content. Franklin Furnace is dedicated to serving artists by providing both physical and virtual venues for the presentation of time-based art, including but not limited to artists' books and periodicals, installation art, performance art, and unforeseen contemporary avant-garde artforms; and to undertake other activities related to these purposes. In 2014, Franklin Furnace organized a city wide exhibition, “inClimate: Climate Change Solutions, Awareness and Action.” Through artistic interventions, it aimed to highlight the need for actions related to the climate change, specifically in the underserved communities of New York City. This project is an outgrowth of the exhibition. Sonya was an EcoArt Fellow of Franklin Furnace in partnership with Pratt.

Community-based partner:
Rockaway Waterfront Alliance [RWA]; RISE Center The Rockaways, Queens

Rockaway Waterfront Alliance is a community-based organization dedicated to empowering residents of underserved communities in the Rockaways to play a role in the determination of their neighborhoods. RWA provides enriching education and community programming, which instill both individual and civic respect for nature, and contribute to advancing the physical, economic and social sustainability in the Rockaway Peninsula.


Exploration

<p>Sonya Gimon</p>
<h1>Restoring the Land(fill)</h1>
<h2>Can a landfill be sustainable?</h2>

<p>Today, landfills are considered almost an antonym of sustainability.  Although there have been even worse ways to deal with our waste in history, such as dumping it in the ocean. Landfilling is a straightforward way to do what we all do in our kitchens, but on a larger scale. 
Today, cities around the world are setting the goals to decrease the amount of waste sent to landfills by recycling and reusing the waste.</p> 

<p>There exist a number of innovative ways to think of the sustainable future for our waste, ways to think of decreasing the opportunities for even creating it at all. However, those are all forward looking concepts that do not address the waste heritage that we have already accumulated. For many years, landfilling has been an important method of waste disposal, and we have no choice but to deal with this heritage today and tomorrow.</p>

<p>Former landfills present both challenges and opportunities for the city and the environment on a variety of levels.  After they stop to operate as disposal sites, they typically undergo a process of capping and remediation and remain as significant areas of engineered landscapes with an open end-use.</p>

<p>Urban and landscape design are disciplines that by identifying the assets of the sites, find ways for them to outweigh the existing challenges. Thinking about the new use for remediated landfill sites, we need to think in the same terms, finding out what are the benefits that those sites bring in, and what are the challenges that may arise from the nature of the landfill landscape.</p>

<p>To be able to find out what are the challenges and opportunities of a capped landfill for the new end-use, we need to understand how its structure functions today and how it will function in the future. I would like to examine each layer of the landfill cap in an attempt to highlight both its promising and discouraging characteristics that should inform the work of an urban or landscape designer who has taken on a task of creating a master plan for a remediated landfill site.</p> 



<h2>Landfills: history can be hazardous</h2>

<p>The ultimate goal of the landfill cap, or the number of layers placed on top of the compacted garbage, is to isolate the surrounding environment from the contact with the potential contamination coming from the garbage. It is important to note, that landfills may vary in regards to the composition of the garbage. Many of the landfills operated for more than 50 years. When they started to function as disposal sites, the understanding and legislation related to the environmental preservation and protection was different from what it is today. Illegal dumping of hazardous waste could have also been the case at different points of a landfill’s life.</p>

<p>It wasn’t discovered until much later, that such illegal dumping happened in Edgemere landfill. The landfill was opened in 1938 in Edgemere, a neighbourhood located in the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens. It was created at the site directly adjacent to Jamaica Bay, which meant that any contamination could easily spread to the waters of the bay. Jamaica Bay is the largest water body in New York City and is surrounded by residential neighbourhoods both on its southern side, the Rockaways, and its northern side touching both the boroughs of Brooklyn and Queens.</p> 

<p>In the 1980s, it was confirmed that illegal disposal of liquid chemical and industrial waste had taken place from 1974 to1979 at several active landfills in New York City. In 1982, drums containing solvents, such as paint were uncovered at the base of the Edgemere Landfill, away from the active disposal area. The Department of Sanitation conducted investigations to determine the safest way to handle them, and in 1990, the drums were removed. In 1991, the rest of the site was closed for disposal.</p> 

<h2>Landfill layers: why the garbage should be isolated</h2>

<p>When the landfill reaches its capacity, or for other social, political or environmental reasons the decision of closing the landfill is being taken, a final cap is constructed to minimise the infiltration of rainwater, waste dispersal, accommodate settling and facilitate long term maintenance. The cap, designed to isolate the content of the landfill from the environment produces a situation where the waste decomposes largely in the absence of oxygen. Closed landfill sites have two major ways in which they can contaminate the environment — through gas and leachate.</p>

<p>The biological processes in the landfill are happening in the anaerobic conditions. It results in the production of large quantities of gas, that consist of methane, carbon dioxide, water and various trace components such as ammonia, sulphide, and non-methane volatilise organic compounds. The combination of these gases produced by a landfill is called landfill gas. The amount of landfill gas produced is such that, globally, landfills are the third largest human driven source of methane. In the US, landfills are the second largest source of anthropogenic methane accounting for 22% of methane emissions. (Reinhart 2012, 4)</p>

<p>Coming back to the idea of retrospective thinking and waste heritage, it was not until 2008 that the US made capturing the landfill gas a priority. In fact, for many years the landfill gas was released into the atmosphere or flared. The composition of landfill gas may vary depending on the composition of the garbage present in the landfill, but typically methane constitutes over 60 percent, and carbon dioxide over 30 percent. The rate of landfill gas production can also vary and depend on the types of waste, the moisture content, temperature, pH and density of waste, the infill rate and degree of compaction. (EPA 1999, 6)</p>

<p>It is important to bring the time dimension too. The gas is not produced at the same rate forever. Typically, the large amount of gas is produced during the first 10 years after closure at a rate of 10 m3 of gas produced per tonne of disposed waste. (EPA 1999, 7)</p>

<p>The second way in which the landfill can communicate with the surrounding environment is through releasing leachate. Leachate is the liquid that is produced when the rain or storm water infiltrates through the decomposing garbage and leaves the contained area bringing any substances or chemicals from the waste to the ground or surface water.</p> 

<p>Landfill gas and leachate are the two main challenges of the closed landfill that inform the design of the landfill cap. The cap can typically consist of of vegetation and supporting soil, a filter and drainage layer, a hydraulic barrier, foundation for the hydraulic barrier, and a gas control layer.</p>

<p>Having a closer look at each of the layers can help to understand which issues should be addressed when it comes to designating the new use for the site, and how sustainable that use can ideally be.</p>


<h2>Plastic liner: trust but verify</h2>

<p>The key layer that contains the gas, and prevents precipitation from becoming leachate is the plastic liner. Geomembranes, predominantly high-density polyethylene (HDPE), have been used as bottom liners in landfills. They have also been used as caps and, more recently, for floating covers on leachate ponds. In the 1980s, HDPE displaced PVC (Polyvinyl chloride) because of its broader chemical resistance, its high strength, its flexibility achieved without additives, its weathering resistance that allows it to be left uncovered, and its ability to be integrally fusion-welded by thermal methods avoiding the use of solvents and adhesives. (Waste Management World 2008)</p>

<p>Theoretically, the plastic liner with help of other systems and layers described later, can make the landfill safe for any after-use, assuming that it creates a perfect barrier between the waste and the outside world. However, a closer look at this landfill layer demonstrates a number of challenges, as well as things that potentially can go wrong both in the process of installation and in the long term.</p>

<p>When we think about creating a new use for a site, we need to understand how stable is that site. There has been research done investigating into the lifespan of the HDPE geomembranes in relation to different factors.  Among the factors that can affect the lifespan is the thickness of the geomembrane, the amount of its exposure to weather conditions, as well as the quality of its installation. (Denis 2012, 1)</p> 

<p>The lifetime of a geomembrane can be considered to have ended when it cracks so
extensively that its presence as a fluid barrier is compromised on a massive basis over large
areas. This is why to understand the durability of a geomembrane it is important to take into account the reasons for the potential cracks.  Among those reasons are: 1) the basic chemical engineering of the resin itself 2) the anti-oxidant package in the resin formulation 3) temperature 4) allowable stress and strains. (Denis 2012, 5)</p>

<p>All the chemical factors that can define how long the geomembrane will live, along with the physical factors defined by the quality of installation lead to an understanding of relative fragility of the material. The fragility of the key material in turn leads to the understanding of the fragility of the whole system. When an urban or landscape designer approaches the task of designing a master plan for the former landfill site, what guarantees does he have that his design will live on. Is it a possibility that once the design is already put in place (be it a natural park, or a construction), the plastic liner fails, and the content of the landfill comes into contact with the environment, potentially making the site hazardous for public health?</p>

<p>Possibly, the design itself should include a backup plan allowing for the restoration of the liner. If that was the case, that would be a major starting point for the work on the master plan. It is an extraordinary design challenge to try to come up with a plan that would allow for deconstruction necessary for the reparation works, if such were necessary.</p> 

<p>Another physical danger inherent to the plastic liners on the landfill is the slope instability.  There have been many cases of side-slope failures of the landfill cap due to designs not taking account of saturated soil conditions.  In some cases the cover soil slips on the geomembrane, leaving the geomembrane undamaged, and in other cases the cover soil takes the geomembrane with it and tears the geomembrane. (Waste Management World 2008) In regards to the slope-stability challenge, there is a clear need for collaboration between the engineers and designers who create the internal structure, and those responsible for the above ground level design.  There might be conditions that can be included in the design of the above ground at the slopes that can contribute to the stability of the below ground structure. Those might include the landscape reorganisation in such a way that the weight would be distributed in a beneficial way.  The rain or storm water would be also directed in the desired directions.</p> 

<p>Another factor that could inform the design, would be the idea of monitoring the site itself. How do we know if the liner failed? In such a situation we would probably see the increased amount of leachate and gas, the parameters that the Department of Sanitation has to monitor, until the remediation period is over. The designer’s challenge would be to incorporate the monitoring process itself into the design rather than ignoring it as a burdensome process.</p>

<h2>Gas vent: self-sufficient landfills</h2>

<p>Another layer of the landfill cap is the gas collection system. Among all of the landfill layers, this is the one that probably presents the most dramatic contrast between challenges and opportunities. As I described earlier, the gas produced in the process of decomposition of organic materials is primarily composed of methane and carbon dioxide. These two gases are known as greenhouse gases contributing to climate change.

<p>To control the gas, the landfill cap includes vertical or horizontal wells that are either vented into the atmosphere or connected to a central blower system that pulls gas to a flare or treatment process.  The actual ability to control landfill gas with a cover is not well known.  The Environmental Protection Agency states that none of the gas can be captured without a cover, and 75% of the gas can be recovered with the application of daily, intermediate, and final covers. However, field studies suggest that capture with a geomembrane cap significantly exceeds 90%. In addition, covers can be designed and operated to encourage methanotrophic bacteria to consume methane and reduce the fugitive emission rate considerably. (Reinhart 2012, 3)</p>

<p>The gas emissions present a rather straightforward choice of either letting it escape into the atmosphere and act as a greenhouse gas, or capturing it and converting it to energy, the technology that has already been widely used. According to the EPA,  about three-fourths of currently operational projects in the United States generate electricity from landfill gas.  Today, there are a few main methods used in the gas-to-energy projects, among them — internal combustion engines, turbines, microturbines, and fuel cells.  The majority of projects use internal combustion engines or turbines, with microturbine technology being used at smaller landfills and in niche applications.(Environmental Protection Agency)</p> 

<p>In 2010,  there were over 540 landfill gas recovery projects in the US capturing and beneficially using some 9.4 billion m3 of landfill gas annually.  The energy produced by these projects is equivalent to heating over 2.1 million homes. The reduced emissions from these projects are over 75 million metric tonnes of carbon equivalents per year. (Reinhart 2012, 4)</p>

<p>Only a few years ago, no serious measures were taken to stop the landfills from releasing methane and carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. It seems like today the trend has shifted to the effective reuse of the gas for energy production. However, not all of the gas is captured, and some still goes into the air. Is there a design solution that could reuse even those 10 or less percent that are not contained by the liner and not captured by the wells?</p> 

<p>Converting the landfill gas into energy means the presence of the gas treatment facility on site. It also means the presence of many sampling ports or gas vents that stick out of the ground. In fact, thanks to the vents located every few feet, it is so easy to recognise the former landfills looking at the satellite images.  Those are visual characteristics that should inform the potential design, but more than that they are important assets that could bring in new meanings to the design.</p>

<p>The rate at which the landfill produces gas decreases over time. This fact encourages us to incorporate a time dimension to the design project, where at each stage of the landfill gas activity, the design makes a proper use of it. The gas can potentially power the construction process making the landfill restoration project self-sufficient. When there is not enough gas anymore, can the facility be repurposed for a new use too? Can the energy generated during the bioactive years of landfill be used for creating a new, more longterm method of energy production assuring the self-sufficiency of the landfill in the future?</p> 

<p>Landfills are generally large elevated sites located near the water. In the urban conditions of increasing density, those areas might be unique for renewable energy production. This might an opportunity for the solar panels and wind turbines that need a lot of space, and which is often lacking in the cities.</p> 

<p>The other ultimate characteristic of many landfills, including Pennsylvania Avenue landfill, Fontaine Avenue landfill and Edgemere landfill (all currently with no designated new use) is that they have high elevation. The three landfills are located directly adjacent to Jamaica Bay,  which is known for its extreme vulnerability to floods due to its location near both the Atlantic ocean and the bay, as well as its low elevation. In fact, over 60 percent of Jamaica Bay watershed is covered by the 100-year floodplain, while Rockaway peninsula is almost fully covered. (FEMA 2016) The only sites that stand out in the floodplain maps are the three landfills, some of which are almost 60 feet higher in elevation than the surrounding land.</p>

<p>Today, when the planet is facing climate change and the sea level rise, the vulnerability of the areas like Rockaway peninsula will continue to increase.  Analyzing biophysical vulnerabilities such as tidal inundation and coastal flooding can inform land use decisions in such a way that would allow to minimize damages in case of disasters. The 2016 article by Melissa Wagner, Joanna Merson and Elizabeth A. Wentz discusses Staten Island’s land use in the situation of Hurricane Sandy, and whether different planning decisions, enriched by the understanding of potential disasters, could prevent the damages to people and built environment. (Wagner 2016, 33)</p>

<p>One of the sea level rise and increasingly frequent floods mitigation methods that is being used today is the creation of barriers between the ocean and the inhabited areas by bringing in tonnes of sand or soil, an undertaking that requires a lot of resources. Could we make use of the existing high elevation of the landfills by locating strategic energy production on the least vulnerable sites? Are there wind turbines that could make use of the hurricane wind for producing energy in the situations where many of the other electricity facilities might be flooded?</p>

<h2>Top soil layer: experimentation ground</h2>

<p>The top layer of the landfill cap is the vegetation layer, or top soil layer. Essentially, the idea of having vegetation on top of the capped landfill comes from the engineering requirements too. It serves to ensure the soil stability which in turn ensures the stability of the engineered layers beneath it.</p>  

<p>The ecological conditions of urban soil at a location inform the potential for the ecosystems at this location. Often, urban soils are different in their composition in comparison to more rural sites. Due to anthropogenic factors, physical, biological and chemical characteristics of urban soils are different from those in non-urbanized areas. Improving the soil might affect the way we look at what kind of life is possible. (Pavao-Zuckerman 2011, 642)</p>

<p>After closure, landfills are covered by the layer of soil.  Although, at a first glance it might seem that it is more challenging to create a successful (or self-sustaining) ecosystem at a landfill, is it possible that we actually have an advantage over the conventional urban areas of being able to choose what kind of new soil we are bringing in?</p> 

<p>In his paper on ecological restoration, Mattias Gross describes the process of ecological restoration on a landfill in Lake Michigan, seeing it as a life experimental platform to test both natural and social processes. (Gross 2005, 269) Landfills can be found at a variety of locations, having different characteristics, such as climate conditions, quality of surrounding water, proximity to inhabited areas, influence on community life, time after or to the closure, amount of waste and others. Can the landfills around the world be experimentation sites for ecological restoration (taking into consideration that here we are creating the ecosystem almost entirely from scratch) and social involvement into that process (taking in consideration, that a dump-park transformation can have the most dramatic emotional effect on communities).</p>

<p>Another interesting opportunity of ecological restoration on landfills is again related to the idea of ecosystem generation from scratch. In the northeastern US, many of the inactive landfills fail to undergo natural succession to woodland, instead retaining a weedy, herbaceous cover for many years. This gives us an opportunity to test our ability to encourage the ecosystem to develop. One of the ways, suggested by George Robinson and Steven Handel, is the introduction of clusters of trees and shrubs to attract avian seed dispersal. (Robinson 1993, 271)</p>

<p>Another way to look at it would be in relation to what we actually want to see as a new ecosystem.  At the closed landfill we have an opportunity to introduce the type of soil we choose and the type of plants we consider the most suitable. In the global situation of species extinction and the decrease in variety of plants, is this an opportunity to grow the plants that are otherwise facing extinction? For instance, New York City has a bank of native plant seeds which are growing or once have grown in the region. Could the landfill sites become testing grounds for the native plants that have been displaced by urbanization?</p>


<h2>Conclusion: why landfills can inspire innovation in design</h2>

<p1>Many of the measures that we commonly take today, such as gas-to-energy projects, have only a short history. As a designer, I would like to think of it as a positive indicator of even more transformations in the way we treat our waste heritage possibly coming in the future. Sending unsorted waste to landfills is inherently unsustainable because it occupies space, brings potential pollution and burdens to the surrounding communities. It can even contribute to climate change through uncontrolled release of greenhouse gases.</p> 

<p1>Design, and urban design in particular, is about making smart use of assets and converting challenges to the opportunities. Capped landfills are already complex systems with inherent weaknesses and hidden dangers. Designing the new use for an old landfill is about converting those weaknesses and dangers into opportunities.</p>

 <p1>Landfill gases may either be released into the atmosphere and contribute to climate change, or may be captured and converted into clean energy. The closure of a landfill may either mean more waste somewhere else, or may create momentum for rethinking our waste responsibility as a whole. The layers of the capped landfill may either allow for leachate to pollute the surrounding water, or may serve as a home for the new ecosystem.  The in-water location of the landfill may either present an additional danger during now-more-frequent floods, or its high elevation may serve as an asylum. The planning process for new use of the landfill may either be top-down, leading to gentrification and displacement, or may help to nourish the existing community by providing a platform for engagement.</p>

<p1>Redesigning landfills presents the chance to voice those choices and make sure that we are guided by the values that will lead to the sustainable future of the planet.

<p1>Denis  R., D. Tan, and D. Cao. 2012. «A LITERATURE REVIEW ON LIFETIME PREDICTION OF THIN HDPE GEOMEMBRANES IN THE EXPOSED ENVIRONMENT» Paper presented at the Geosynthetics Asia, 5th Asian Regional Conference on Geosynthetics,  December 13-15.<br>

Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. "Landfill Restoration and Aftercare"  Environmental Protection Agency, Ireland.<br>

Gross, Matthias, and Holger Hoffmann-Riem. 2005. “Ecological restoration as a real-world experiment: designing robust implementation strategies in an urban environment,” Public Understanding of Science, no. 14 (3): 269-284.<br>

Kerr, Richard A. 2007. "How Urgent Is Climate Change?" Science, no. 318:1230-1231.<br>

Pavao-Zuckerman, Mitchell A. 2011. “The Nature of Urban Soils and Their Role in Ecological Restoration in Cities,” Restoration Ecology, Volume 16, Issue 4 (December): 642-649.<br>

Reinhart, Debra R., Hamid Amini, Stephanie C. Bolyard. 2012. "The Role of Landfills in US Susta inable Waste Management » Environmental Engineers, Volume 15, Winter: 2-6.<br>

Robinson,  George R. and Steven N. Handel. 1993. « Forest Restoration on a Closed Landfill: Rapid Addition of New Species by Bird Dispersal » Conservation Biology, Volume 7, No. 2: 271-278.<br>

Wagner, Melissa, Joanna Merson, and Elizabeth A. Wentz. 2016. “Design with Nature: Key lessons from McHarg’s intrinsic suitability in the wake of Hurricane Sandy,” Landscape and Urban Planning, no. 155: 33-36.<br>

Waste Management World. 2008. "Geomembranes in landfills: Overview of liners, caps and floating covers ». Accessed December 1, 2016. https://waste-management-world.com/a/geomembranes-in-landfills-overview-of-liners-caps-and-floating-covers.<br>

Environmental Protection Agency. « Basic Information about Landfill Gas » Accessed December, 1, 2016. https://www.epa.gov/lmop/basic-information-about-landfill-gas.<br>

FEMA 2016. «FEMA Flood Map Services». Accessed December, 1, 2016. https://msc.fema.gov/portal.</p>

